The Case
The patient was a 26-year-old woman from the Middle East with lymphoma (a cancer that begins in the lymphocytes — the infection-fighting cells of the immune system). First-line treatments had not been effective, and the cancer had spread to some of her organs. Her only remaining option was a stem cell transplant, which was not available in her home country. Her family arranged through the Brigham Health International Patient Center (International Center) for the transplant to take place at the Brigham. The patient’s younger brother and sister accompanied her to Boston and spent their days at her hospital bedside, regularly updating their parents back home. As the family only spoke Arabic and were devout practitioners of the Muslim faith, the International Center provided interpreters to assist with communication and act as cultural liaisons. The Imam (worship leader of a mosque) from Brigham’s Spiritual Care Services also visited frequently to offer emotional support and spiritual guidance specific to the family’s religious beliefs.

Despite all efforts to reverse the course of her disease, the patient’s health continued to decline, and she began to develop multiple-organ system failure. It was the consensus of her treatment team that she was actively dying, and that further interventions would cause more harm than benefit. The team explained this to the brother, the patient’s designated health care agent, and recommended terminal extubation (withdrawal of the breathing tube and mechanical ventilator that were keeping her alive). The brother declined this medical recommendation and asked that all interventions be continued “until she is better.” He said that decisions about life and death were “in God’s hands.” He also felt a deep sense of responsibility to his family, knowing that they expected him to do everything possible to save his sister’s life.

The team did not feel comfortable overriding the brother’s wishes. An ethics consultation was requested to address this tension and consider the limitations of treatment that would be ethically appropriate in these circumstances.