Discussion
Many Boston-area teaching hospitals, including the Brigham, are seeing an increase in international patients, who are drawn to these institutions by their global reputation for excellence. These patients come to us from a broad spectrum of beliefs and traditions which often contrast with the expectations regarding health care, particularly end-of-life care, in the U.S.

Patients from the Middle East who follow certain Islamic teachings generally place emphasis on the role of God, physician and family in guiding the decision-making process (Moazam 2000). Physicians are viewed as an instrument of God’s mercy, vested by God with the power of healing. It is expected that physicians will act as authority figures and make decisions about treatment and its limits. This is understood as a physician responsibility and an expression of caring (Moazam 2001). In contrast, in the U.S. medical system, which places a higher value on patient autonomy, taking such a directive approach could be viewed as an intrusive act of paternalism (Moazam 2000).

Another difference is the degree of family involvement in patient care decisions. In the U.S., there is an emphasis on personal decision making, which can be extendedto a health care proxy agent if patients become too ill to make decisions for themselves. In contrast, it is less common in Muslim societies for physicians to talk about the details of care directly with the patient; this is particularly true at the end of life, when candid discussions about prognosis are understood to cause undue distress and despair. Rather, physicians discuss the patient’s condition with family members and consider their input in making treatment recommendations. “Family-centered decision-making works in tandem with an active, directive role assumed by the physician that stresses the principles of beneficence and nonmaleficence rather than patient autonomy” (Moazam 2000).

The challenge in this case was to find a way to reconcile these seemingly incompatible models of decision making and the ethical conflict that flowed from them. The team wanted to show respect for the family’s faith-based and culturally consistent desire to “do everything” for the patient; at the same time, they felt responsible for avoiding the harm this could entail.

During the ethics consultation, there was lengthy discussion about the patient’s clinical situation and the family’s religious and cultural norms, values and expectations regarding end-of-life care. The group recognized the importance of communicating to the brother and sister that they had done everything they could to save the patient, understanding that this narrative would be vital to the family. They also discussed the hazards of interpreting “doing everything” literally, and that this does not mean deploying all available interventions. Rather, clinicians have a responsibility to use their professional expertise, experience and judgment to make decisions about treatments that are medically beneficial, the options for which narrow at the end of life. “As the patient approaches death, the clinician plays a larger role in decision making, not by taking control, but rather by identifying viable medical options” (Roeland et al. 2014). Reframing “doing everything” to “doing everything clinically beneficial,” and only offering potentially beneficial treatments to a dying patient, reflects the responsibility of clinicians and avoids inappropriately burdening families.

Continuing this line of thought, there was consensus that the team should not offer treatments they did not think would benefit the patient in the face of her impending death. The group agreed on the following recommendations:

To communicate the plan of care with the patient’s brother and sister, using the language of “doing everything possible that will help the patient” to convey the intended message
To offer support to family members living in the home country via Skype or telephone
To be open to discussion about the interplay between clinical judgment and spiritual beliefs
To continue involving the Imam for emotional support and spiritual guidance specific to the family’s religious beliefs.
Shortly after the ethics consultation, team members met with the brother and sister to review the care plan, which was to continue current interventions and manage any pain or discomfort, but not to escalate treatment or attempt cardiac resuscitation because her body was no longer responding to treatments and she was dying. The care team reiterated that they had done everything possible that would help her, and offered to speak with family at home. The patient’s brother and sister thanked the team for all that they had done, but declined conversation with their overseas relatives. The patient died several days later and the International Office supported her siblings until their return home.

